Chunking is the process of breaking down large domain-specific documents into tiny chunks. These chunks are then vectorized (i.e. embedded by an encoder) and stored in the vector DB. When a user asks a query, then a Context is generated by searching for chunks matching the query & extracting & combining the relevant portions from them. The query & the Context is then sent to the LLM for response generation. Types of chunking:

Fixed-size chunking: Divides documents into equal-sized chunks (with option of overlap at boundaries to smoothen out the cuts).
Recursive chunking: Splits text hierarchically using a list of known separators. It starts with the most significant separator and recurses until the chunks meet the size criteria, preserving the document’s inherent structure. Due to the way it chunks, we get some kind of a hierarchical structure. For e.g, when chunking a Word doc, one can divide the text into paragraphs first, then into new lines, then sentences & finally words. The separator list is something like: ["\n\n", "\n", ". ", " "].
Content-aware chunking: Here we use the document’s inherent structure, such as HTML tags (in case of a web page) to guide the splitting process. This is a more customized version of recursive chunking that has nuances specific to the document being chunked.
Hierarchical chunking: This overlaps with the above 2 approaches & need not actually be a separate category. The only key feature here is that an expert decides the different levels of granularity & the domain specific hierarchies based on the actual format of data that is contained in the documents. E.g., for a research paper, one could have a high level hypothesis set and then a lower layer of chunks for detailed arguments.
Adaptive chunking dynamically adjusts key parameters (e.g., chunk size, overlap) based on the document’s content instead of applying a fixed hyper-parameter set for the entire corpus. Advanced adaptive chunking use ML models to determine the best size for any given chunk & overlap size etc. Then, we have Post Chunking, where whole documents are initially embedded & stored in VectorDB. Chunking happens only at query time & the chunking strategy is adjusted based on the query. Caching can be used to offset performance issues. Note: While, I could see 3–4 blogs on this subject I couldn’t get hold of a formal paper.
Code chunking takes into account ASTs which consider function beginning & end etc while splitting and is a fairly advanced topic in itself.
We could strengthen some of the above approaches with libraries like NTLK/Spacy which efficiently divide the text into separate sentences, enabling better context preservation in the resulting chunks. Alternatively:

Semantic chunking using sentence embeddings to identify and split text at points where the topic or semantic meaning significantly shifts. The process involves: a) Splitting the text into sentences b) Creating an embedding for each sentence c) Measuring the cosine distance between the embeddings of adjacent sentences d) Breaking the text where the distance exceeds a threshold.
Topic-aware chunking: Use topic modeling algorithms like BERTopic or LDA to identify when topics change & use those points as chunk.
Late chunking where we feed the full document into a long-context embedding model which creates detailed, token-level embeddings that understand the full picture. Then we split the document into chunks. The chunk embedding is simply the average of the token embeddings inside it. Since these embeddings were pre-created with full context, every chunk retains better context about the whole document. The “Late” here simply imples that chunking is applied after passing the tokens thru’ the transformer model and just before mean pooling & this approach is completely different from post-chunking.
Simply use LLM models themselves to return chunks.
Hierarchically cluster the text based on embeddings.
Libraries such as Langchain provide chunking functionality out of the box. Custom code too can be written for the chosen strategy. Based on the type of document involved (e.g. word, excel, PDF etc), the toolset can be chosen.

A related question is — How do we keep the chunks up to date? Before answering that, let us look at a McKinsey report which says that 90% AI projects don’t go beyond pilot stage. An MIT report pegs this as high as 95%. The ease with which a regular (i.e. non-AI) coder can bring up a simple pilot RAG system in a few hours shows the democratization of AI technologies thanks to all the frameworks & wrappers available. The challenge starts when there is a need of productionizing & scaling. Plain vanilla approaches must give way to advanced RAG mechanisms and an engineering mindset needs to kick in to handle the scalability aspects. One also needs to consider all aspects of LLM Ops. There are several but w.r.t chunking a key consideration is — how do we keep the RAG chunks up to date?